== hashcode and equals in Java
:figures: 11-development/01-java/01-basics/articles/02-hashcode-and-equals

https://marcus-biel.com/hashcode-and-equals/[Source]

This article is part of Marcus Biel’s free Java 8 course focusing on
clean code principles. It concludes a series where we go over all the
methods of the java.lang.Object class. Since hashCode and equals are two
of _java.lang.Object_’s methods which follow a contract that binds them
together, it makes sense to talk about both methods together. In fact,
they are bound in such a way that we cannot implement one without the
other and expect to have a well-written class. Knowing all the details
about these two methods is essential to becoming a better Java
programmer. So what do these two methods do?

=== equals method

The equals method is used to compare two objects for equality, similar
to the equals operator used for primitive values.

....
@Test
public void primitivesShouldBeEqual() {
    int i = 4;
    int j = 4;
    assertTrue(i == j);
}
....

Example 1

In Example 1, we can see that _CarTest_ will pass for
_primitivesShouldBeEqual_, since the equality operator *==* inherently
works for primitives. The two primitive values i and j are assigned
respectively as follows, i = 4 and j = 4. Asserting with the equals
operator succeeds and we get a passing test, as expected.

    @Test     public void stringShouldBeEqual() \{         String hello1
= "`Hello`";         String hello2 = "`Hello`";         String hello3 =
"`H`";         hello3 = hello3 + "`ello`";        
System.out.println(hello3);         assertTrue(hello1.equals(hello3));
    }

Example 2

In Example 2, stringShouldBeEqual has two distinct String reference
variables, hello1 and hello2, with two distinct "`__Hello__`" String
constants assigned to them. Before we talk about equals, let’s look at
what would happen if we tried comparing these two Strings with the
*equality operator which is used for primitive values*. hello1 == hello2
would return true without needing to use the equals method at all.

This is because String values are optimized in the background for
constants wherein there is actually only one of them and both variables
point to the same object in memory. The part of memory where the
variables _hello1_ and _hello2_ are stored is called a *stack*. On the
other hand, the actual single "`__Hello__`" object both variables point
to is stored in another part of memory called the *heap*.

Going back to our equality operator scenario, things become a little
more complicated as soon as we add a new String variable where we
initialize _hello3_ to "`H`" and re-assign _hello3_ to itself
concatenated with "`__ello__`". hello1 == hello3 would evaluate to
false. Printing them both out, we would expect the hello1 == hello3 to
evaluate to true. However, String has the same gotcha as do other
objects, i.e. we should not use the equality operator on objects,
including Strings. Instead, we use the equals method as is shown on
Example 2, line 8.

=== *String’s equals method*

    public boolean equals(Object anObject) \{ if (this == anObject) \{
return true; } if (anObject instanceof String) \{ String anotherString =
(String) anObject; int n = value.length; if (n ==
anotherString.value.length) \{ char v1[] = value; char v2[] =
anotherString.value; int i = 0; while (n– != 0) \{ if (v1[i] != v2[i])
return false; i++; } return true; } } return false; }

Example 3

The String class has an equals method as seen in Example 3. First, it
checks if the equality operator works for the two Strings being
compared. This is actually checking to see if both variables share the
same reference, i.e. pointing to the same String in memory – making it a
performance optimization.

Afterwards, it checks if the second object is actually a String. This is
achieved with the *instanceof* operator. instanceof safely casts the
object to a String so that we can compare both of them. An instanceof
feature which many developers do not know about is that it includes a
check for null. A *null* object will _never_ be a String and will never
evaluate to true. Lastly, the method simply loops through and compares
each String’s characters for equality, returning true if and _only_ if
they are all completely equal.

String is actually a subclass of Object and its equals method is
overridden, making it work on Strings like hello1 and hello3 from
Example 1 as expected.

=== User classes

....
@Test
public void porscheShouldBeEqual() {
    Car myPorsche1 = new Car("Marcus", "Porsche", "silver");
    Car myPorsche2 = new Car("Marcus", "Porsche", "silver");
    assertTrue(myPorsche1.equals(myPorsche2));
}
....

Example 4

Consider two instances of a custom class _Car_ in Example 4. It is an
instance of our Car class defined in Example 4 which happens to be a
silver _Porsche_ owned by _Marcus_. Both instances seem to have exactly
the same attributes, so we would expect them to be the same car. Using
the equals operator on them however returns false. It doesn’t work and
the test fails because we have two distinct instances.

Consider the simple case where _myPorsche1 == myPorsche1_, comparing
_myPorsche1_ to itself. This comparison returns true as the equality
operator inherently returns true whenever we compare an object to
itself. Moving on to _myPorsche1 == myPorsche2_, it would seem that we
would need to use the equals method again. In fact, running the
assertion fails our test. So we try using equals by asserting
_myPorsche1.equals(myPorsche2)_ only to find ourselves greeted with a
failing test result. This was working so nicely for Strings, so why is
it not working with Car?

If we closely follow the execution of our code, we would discover that
we eventually end up in the Object class because our Car class does not
define and override its own equals method. What actually ends up
happening internally is a comparison by the object with itself. In our
case, _myPorsche1.equals(myPorsche2)_ would only compare the reference
variables themselves and not the actual Car objects. This comparison
would invariably return false simply because we have two different
reference variables.

At any rate, it would be possible to make this true again if we were to
assign _myPorsche2_ to _myPorsche1_. This would make it so the object
initialized to _myPorsche2_ no longer has a variable pointing to it.
This would also make both variables point to the object _myPorsche1_ was
initialized to. Running the comparison yet again, we would then have a
successful test run because we would have compared the same object with
itself again. Unfortunately, this is not what we want. Instead, we want
to compare both objects in a way that makes sense for our program.

Let’s have a look at the Car class.

package com.marcusbiel.javacourse;

public class Car \{

....
private String owner;
private String manufacturer;
private String color;

public Car(String owner, String manufacturer, String color) {
    this.owner = owner;
    this.manufacturer = manufacturer;
    this.color = color;
}

@Override
public boolean equals(Object obj) {
    return false;
}

\[...\]
....

}

Example 5

Example 5 shows a small simple class with a constructor, some
attributes, and an equals method. Notice that we do not have Car car as
the parameter for our equals method. We cannot do this because of
Object’s original equals signature, so instead we want our parameter to
be something like Object obj. Later on we have to cast it to Car similar
to what we saw earlier with the String class.

Moreover, it’s always a good idea to add the _@Override_ annotation to
ensure that we have properly overridden the method. Our equals
implementation is a stub that only returns false as a placeholder value
though, and we will eventually have to flesh out the details. It turns
out however that implementing equals is not so easy, so we will need to
tackle some more theory before we continue.

=== Design

image::{figures}/image.png[equal objects] Example 6

Most of the time, developers just skip the design of this method and
simply click on "`__auto-generate__`" which in many cases leads to
severe bugs or at least sub-optimal performance. To implement equals
correctly, however, we have to define what makes two Car instances equal
in a way that makes sense for the context of the program it is used in.
Does it make sense in its context for two cars to be equal when they
have the same manufacturer? When they have the same manufacturer and
color? The same engine? Or the same number of wheels? The same top
speed? The same vehicle identification number (VIN)?

Based on the context, we have to decide which set of fields can be used
to identify an object and which fields to compare are redundant.
Additionally, for improved performance, we need to define the order in
which we want to compare the attributes. Are there any fields with a
high chance of being unequal? Do some fields compare faster than others?
Implementing a meaningful equals method requires analysis of these
aspects in great detail.

image::{figures}/image-1.png[two equal objects] Example 7

In this example, we assume that the car’s top speed relates to the type
of the engine in some form, making it a redundant field which is not so
helpful for implementing equals – so we remove it. Let’s say our cars
always have four wheels in our example. The number of wheels would not
help us to differentiate between cars. What about the VIN? This would
again depend on the type of program we want to create. For the police,
this is probably the only proper way of identification. But what about a
program the manufacturer uses? While the car is still being built, the
VIN would probably be less important.

We just cannot make broad assumptions about how we tell between cars.
This is something that should be verified with the business people
involved with the program. Based on what we gather from them, we select
attributes from our two Car instances to compare and in what order. In
our upcoming example, we are the business analyst and the developer as
well, so we will just go ahead and define two cars to be different when
they have different VINs.

=== The equals contract

First of all, there are five conditions that our equals implementation
have to comply with. These are all actually pretty straightforward, so
let’s go through some examples and see what they imply:

* *Reflexivity* _"`An object must be equal to itself.`"_ This implies
that myOldCar.equals(myOldCar) should always return true. This is pretty
trivial but it is still important to make sure we test for it.
* *Symmetry* _"`Two objects must agree whether or not they are
equal.`"_ If _myOldCar.equals(someOtherCar)_ returns true, then so
should _someOtherCar.equals(myOldCar)_. This also sounds pretty obvious
when it fact it isn’t so when it comes to inheritance. If you have a Car
class and a BMW subclass of Car, it follows that all BMWs are cars but
not every car is a BMW. This makes the rule quite tricky to follow. Make
sure to cover each contract condition with a dedicated unit test to make
sure the class stays fully compliant with the contract.
* *Transitivity* _"`If one object is equal to a second, and the second
to a third, the first must be equal to the third.`"_ This rule is
actually more straightforward than it actually looks. For instance,
let’s say we have three cars: _carA, carB and carC. If carA == carB_,
and _carB == carC, then carA == carC_.
* *Consistency* _"`If two objects are equal, they must remain equal for
all time, unless one of them is changed.`"_ This implies that two
objects should not be altered in any way by the equals method. So when
you repeatedly compare the same two objects with the equals method, it
should always return the same result.
* *Null returns false* _"`All objects must be unequal to null.`"_ This
last rule is what Josh Bloch, author of
http://amzn.to/2FEQgV2[*_Effective Java_*], calls "`__Non-nullity__`".
When given a null as an equals method parameter, we should always return
false and never throw a _NullPointerException_.

=== Collections and Hashes

image::{figures}/image-2.png[Hash buckets] Example 8

In Java, similar objects are usually put into a "`__collection__`" for
processing. Java collections are like more powerful arrays, or "`arrays
on steroids`"! Among other things, it allows us to look up objects not
only based on position, but also by their specific values. This is where
the equals method comes into play. To speed up the lookup, the creators
of Java added specific hash-based containers which use the hash value as
a grouping mechanism to reduce the number of equal comparisons needed.
Ideally, objects *considered* *unequal* by *equals* will return
*different hash codes* which are used to group objects in
"`__buckets__`". In this ideal case, we will be able to find each object
simply by a lookup based on its hash value. +
image::{figures}/image-3.png[Hash collisions] Example 9

However, there are "`__hash collisions__`" that come up from two unequal
objects sharing the same hash code; in which case they end up in the
same bucket. If we are looking for, say, the instance _dadsCar_, we have
to look up the correct bucket based on the hash code minus 391 that
_dadsCar_ will return. With the hash collision however, we will have to
do an equals comparison on a list of two cars on top of getting the hash
codes.

=== The hashCode contract

Implementing hashCode comes with two rules. The first one being:

_"`For any two objects, return the same hash code when equals returns
true.`"_

To achieve this, we use the same identifying attributes for both
methods, in the same order. The second condition is:

_"`When hashCode is invoked more than once and on the same object, it
must consistently return the same int value as long as the object is not
changed.`"_

This rule is similar to the equals consistency rule introduced
previously. Both equals and hashCode methods must return consistent
results.

*To fulfill this contract, you must overwrite hashCode whenever you
overwrite equals and vice versa*. Also, when you add or remove
attributes from your class you will have to adjust your equals and
hashCode methods. Last but not least, *aim to return different hash
codes* when e**quals returns false**. Aiming to return different hash
codes is not a hard and fast rule, but it will improve the performance
of your program by *minimizing the number of hash collisions*. Taken to
its extreme, the _hashCode_ contract allows us to statically return a
placeholder value such as 42 for all objects. As Josh Bloch states in
his book *_http://amzn.to/2FEQgV2[Effective Java]_* however, this could
result in quadratic rather than linear execution time and therefore,
could be the difference between working and not working.

The *hashCode* *method* is in fact a rather complicated beast. It is of
such a level of complexity that should there be new, vastly superior
algorithms for hashing to a 32-bit integer as is the case with Java,
such a discovery would probably earn the highest honors and awards in
computer science. Some of Josh Bloch’s algorithms are some of the
standards we use in Java for hashing as we will see in later examples.

=== hashCode and equals implemented

==== equals

public class Car \{

....
private Vin vehicleIdentificationNumber;
private Manufacturer manufacturer;
private Engine engine;
private Color color;
private int numberOfWheels;

@Override
public boolean equals(Object obj) {
    if (this == obj) {
        return true;
    }
    if (obj == null) {
        return false;
    }
    if (getClass() != obj.getClass()) {
        return false;
    }
    Car other = (Car) obj;
    if (!manufacturer.equals(other.manufacturer)) {
        return false;
    }
    if (!engine.equals(other.engine)) {
        return false;
    }
    if (!color.equals(other.color)) {
        return false;
    }
    return true;
}

@Override
public int hashCode(){...}
....

}

Example 10

Both equals and hashCode use manufacturer, engine and color in their
implementation. These fields are arbitrarily chosen as per the simulated
design phase in our theory discussion because they make sense for our
business scenarios. Consequently, we disregard using other fields like
_numberOfWheels_ and VIN for the two methods. Note that the order in
which they are compared is also arbitrary.

For our scenario, we choose to compare manufacturers first, followed by
engines, and lastly by color. If we compare two objects which are not
equal, we want to leave the method as early as possible because the
earlier we leave, the faster the entire code will run. In our scenario,
we know that there is a plethora of manufacturers, so we can quickly
return false for cars which are most likely to have different
manufacturers.

For our example, engines are more likely to be equal as many
manufacturers use the same engines for many cars. Even though there are
actually millions of colors, we make the assumption that there are only
so many paint jobs and finishes that cars can come in. This way, we
avoid the even higher probability of cars coming in the same color. What
we end up having is a comparison order where we optimize by starting
from the most likely to be unequal to the least likely, i.e. comparing
manufacturers, then engines and lastly colors. Ideally, performance
tests on actual sets of data will point us towards the best
implementation.

Lines 10-15 in Example 14 come at the top for performance reasons as
well. Firstly, we check if the object is being compared to itself by
comparing this to obj, as is shown on line 10. This can actually be
removed if we know that such a scenario would never happen. That being
said, it is one of the cheaper checks we can make. We then make a very
important check for null on line 12, returning false when passed it and
fulfilling the last part of the equals contract. Doing so helps us avoid
*NullPointerExceptions*. Afterwards, we assert that we are comparing two
Car instances. Failing this, our cast would throw a
*ClassCastException*.

Now that we can cast obj to Car, we can compare them by their *private*
fields – which we can do because both are instances of the same class.
This allows us to easily say that _engine.equals(other.engine)_, making
the code much more readable and shorter. For each pair of fields we
compare, we can directly leave the method when they are unequal. Only
when we go through all the fields without returning false do we get to
return true. Note that we do not compare _numberOfWheels_ as well as
_vehicleIdentificationNumber_. Firstly, this is because we have cars
which always have four wheels in our example. Secondly, we could have
two physically identical cars, say both blue BMWs with the same engine,
and we would still consider them to be the same car in our program.

==== hashcode

@Override public int hashCode() \{ int result = 1; result = 31 * result
+ manufacturer.hashCode(); result = 31 * result + engine.hashCode();
return 31 * result + color.hashCode(); }

Example 11

We have learned so far that implementing hashCode is quite complex. In
order to understand the importance of the 31 constant, we need to go
over a few details. 31 is a prime number, can be multiplied very quickly
using shift and subtraction as follows: 31 * i == (i << 5) – i, and
according to research, it provides a better key distribution which
minimizes the number of hash collisions. In Example 11, 31 is
successively multiplied with the accumulated result, adding in the hash
codes of the three fields we used earlier for equals. All of this
optimizes our code performance by minimizing the collisions.

As you can see, the method is actually not doing much other than
delegating the calculation of the hash code to the other classes
representing the parts of our car. Out of these three classes, let’s
have a detailed look into Engine to see how hashCode is implemented in
further detail.

===== The Engine Class

package com.marcusbiel.javacourse; public class Engine \{

....
private long type;

private String optionalField;

@Override
public boolean equals(Object obj) {
    if (this == obj) {
        return true;
    }
    if (obj == null) {
        return false;
    }
    if (getClass() != obj.getClass()) {
        return false;
    }
    Engine other = (Engine) obj;

    if (type != other.type) {
        return false;
    }
    if (optionalField == null) {
        if (other.optionalField != null) {
            return false;
        }
    } else if (!optionalField.equals(other.optionalField)) {
        return false;
    }
    return true;
}

@Override
public int hashCode() {
    int result = 1;
    result = 31 \* result + (int) (type ^ (type >>> 32));
    return 31 \* result + ((optionalField == null) ? 0
        : optionalField.hashCode());
}
....

}

Example 12

Engine’s equals method is similar to that of Car’s, a notable difference
being the check for *null* on the _optionalField_. We have to do some
slightly more complicated null checks on both objects’ _optionalField_
variables to prevent any _NullPointerException_. With optional primitive
fields however, we do not need to check for nulls. We do not make these
same assumptions on required fields such as manufacturer, engine and
color, so we also do not make null checks for them. Doing so would
clutter the code with "`__rocket code__`", making it extra safe but
messy. As for _hashCode_, we convert the long field variable type into
an int as shown on Example 12 line 27. Since longs have 64 bits and ints
only have 32, we halve type somehow to minimize collisions.

To understand how this is accomplished, we need to look at _(int) (type
^ (type >>> 32))_. First, we do a bitwise shift with the operator *>>>*
on type over 32 bits. This moves the first 32 bits of type over to its
last 32 bits. Second, we do an "`__exclusive or__`" or "`__xor__`" with
the *^* operator which effectively preserves and merges some of the
information from the two halves of type, ensuring that we minimize
collisions when we finally downcast our long type to an int. Note that
this is the current standard for hashing long fields. We do roughly the
same routine as with Car’s hashCode and accumulate the resulting hash.

=== someClass

@Override public int hashCode() \{ int result = 0; result = 31 * result
+ myByte; result = 31 * result + myShort; result = 31 * result + myInt;
result = 31 * result + (int) (myLong ^ (myLong >>> 32)); result = 31 *
result + Float.floatToIntBits(myFloat);

....
    long temp = Double.doubleToLongBits(myDouble);
    result = 31 \* result + (int) (temp ^ (temp >>> 32));
    result = 31 \* result + (myBoolean ? 1231 : 1237);
    result = 31 \* result + myChar;
    return 31 \* result + myString.hashCode();
}
....

}

Example 13

Example 13 shows a special example which illustrates hashCode
implementation with primitive types in more detail. We see the same
standard long field hashing being used. Floats are handled differently
in that they are converted to integer bits with a native helper function
before being accumulated into the hash. Double, having the same length
as a long, is converted to a long with a native helper function with the
long being converted back and accumulated into the integer result.

Lines 17-18 look very different as they use some special syntax and two
specifically chosen prime constants, namely 1231 and 1237. Line 18 uses
the ternary operator "`**?:**`" which works in a similar way to an
if-else statement, except that it is an expression that evaluates to a
boolean. In this case, you have _myBoolean_ as the if condition where if
true would return 1231, else which returns 1237. As for 1231 and 1237,
these numbers are chosen for being large primes that minimize the number
of hash collisions. Lastly, char is basically a smaller integer number
type, so it is trivial to accumulate it into the hash.

=== equals

@Override public boolean equals(Object obj) \{ if (this == obj) \{
return true; } if (obj == null) \{ return false; } if (getClass() !=
obj.getClass()) \{ return false; } SomeClass other = (SomeClass) obj; if
(myByte != other.myByte) \{ return false; } if (myShort !=
other.myShort) \{ return false; } if (myInt != other.myInt) \{ return
false; } if (myLong != other.myLong) \{ return false; } if
(Float.floatToIntBits(myFloat) != Float.floatToIntBits(other.myFloat))
\{ return false; } if (Double.doubleToLongBits(myDouble) !=
Double.doubleToLongBits(other.myDouble)) \{ return false; } if
(myBoolean != other.myBoolean) \{ return false; } if (myChar !=
other.myChar) \{ return false; } return myString.equals(other.myString);
}

Example 14

For *primitive values*, we simply use the *equality operator*. We start
with the smallest possible values because checking them has the highest
chance of making the code run faster across multiple runs, i.e. we go
from byte, to short, to int, to long and so on. Floating types are a
little more complex to compare. float and double have to be converted to
int and long respectively before we compare them. booleans are trivial
to compare, and we could have placed them at the top for better
performance.

Thorough business analysis can reveal even better ways to arrange these
fields for performance. Again, performance tests on live data are
ultimately the best ways to eke out the fastest possible runtimes when
needed. Of course, all of these optimization techniques would only be
useful if performance were an issue. Otherwise, the comparison order
probably doesn’t matter anyway.