= Cloud Native Development
:figures: 01-system-design/architecture/cloud-native

== 12 Factors

The 12 defines best practices for building web applications with the
following characteristics: * Suitable to be deployed on cloud platforms
* Scalable by design * Portable across systems * Enablers of continuous
deployment and agility

____
TODO Add doc from https://12factor.net/
____

== 1 One codebase, one application

The 15-Factor methodology establishes a one-to-one mapping between an
application and its codebase, so there’s one codebase for each
application. Any shared code should be tracked in its own codebase as a
library that can be included as a dependency or service that can be run
in standalone mode, acting as a backing service for other applications.
Each codebase can optionally be tracked in its own repository.

A deployment is a running instance of the application. Many deployments
are possible in different environments, all sharing the same application
artifact. There is no need to rebuild the codebase to deploy an
application to a specific environment: any aspect that changes between
deployments (such as configuration) should be outside the application
codebase.

A cloud native application should consist of a single codebase tracked
in a version control system like Git. Each codebase must produce
immutable artifacts, called builds, that can be deployed to multiple
environments. 
image::{figures}/image-7.png[Each application has its codebase, from
which immutable builds are produced and then deployed to the appropriate
environments without changes to the code.]

anything environment-specific
like configuration must be outside of the application codebase. In case
of code that’s needed by more than one application, you should either
turn it into an independent service or into a library that you can
import into the project as a dependency. You should carefully evaluate
the latter option to prevent the system from becoming a distributed
monolith.

== 2 API first

The 15-Factor methodology promotes the API first pattern. It encourages
you to establish the service interface first and work on the
implementation later. The API represents a public contract between your
application and its consumers, and it’s in your best interests to define
it first thing.

A cloud native system is usually made up of different services that
communicate through APIs. Using an API first approach while designing a
cloud native application encourages you to think about fitting it into a
distributed system and favors the distribution of the work across
different teams. By designing the API first, another team using that
application as a backing service could create their solution against
that API. By designing the contract up front, integration with other
systems will be more robust and testable as part of the deployment
pipeline. Internally, the API implementation can be changed without
affecting other applications (and teams) depending on it.

Suppose you agree on a contract and define the API first. In that case,
other teams can start working on their solutions and develop against
your API to implement their integration with your application. If you
don’t develop the API first, there will be a bottleneck, and other teams
will have to wait until you’re done with your application. Discussing
the API up front also enables productive discussions with stakeholders,
which can lead to you clarifying the scope of the application and even
defining user stories to implement.

In the cloud, any application can be a backing service for another one.
Adopting an API first mentality will help you evolve your applications
and adapt them to future requirements.

The API first principle recommends designing the API before implementing
the business logic to establish a contract. In this way, other teams can
develop their services to consume your application based on the contract
itself, without waiting for the application to be finished.

=== Evolving APIs for future requirements

* make backward-compatible changes to the API. For example, we can add
an optional field to the Book object without affecting the clients of
the Catalog Service application.
* use API versioning,The version might be part of the endpoint itself,
like /v2/books. Or it might be specified as an HTTP header. This system
helps prevent existing clients from breaking, but they will have to
update their interface to match the new API version sooner or later,
meaning that coordination is needed.
* making the REST API client as resilient to API changes as possible.
The solution is to use the hypermedia aspect of the REST
architecture(HATEOAS)

== 3 Dependency management

All application dependencies should be declared explicitly in a manifest
and be available for the dependency manager to download from a central
repository. In the context of Java applications, we are usually
well-equipped to follow this principle using tools like Maven or Gradle.
The only implicit dependencies an application can have on the
surrounding environment are the language runtime and the dependency
manager tool. This means that private dependencies should be resolved
via the dependency manager.

== 4 Design, build, release, run

A codebase goes through different stages in its journey from design to
deployment in production: * Design stage—Technologies, dependencies, and
tools needed by a specific application feature are decided. * Build
stage—The codebase is compiled and packaged together with its
dependencies as an immutable artifact called a build. The build artifact
must be uniquely identified. * Release stage—The build is combined with
a specific configuration for the deployment. Each release is immutable
and should be uniquely identifiable, such as by using semantic
versioning (for example, 3.9.4) or a timestamp (for example,
2022-07-07_17:21). Releases should be stored in a central repository for
easy access, like when a rollback to a previous version is required. *
Run stage—The application runs in the execution environment from a
specific release.

The 15-Factor methodology requires a strict separation of these stages
and doesn’t allow changes to the code at runtime, since that would
result in a mismatch with the build stage. The build and the release
artifacts should be immutable and labeled with a unique identifier to
guarantee reproducibility.

== 5 Configuration, credentials, and code

The 15-Factor methodology defines configuration as everything likely to
change between deployments. Whenever you need to change the
configuration for an application, you should be able to do so without
any changes in the code, and without building the application again.

The configuration might include resource handles to backing services
like a database or a messaging system, credentials to access third-party
APIs, and feature flags.

Ask yourself if any credential or environment-specific information would
be compromised should your codebase suddenly become public. That will
tell you whether you have correctly externalized the configuration.

To be compliant with this factor, the configuration can’t be included in
the code or tracked in the same codebase. The only exception is the
default configuration, which can be packaged with the application
codebase. You can still use configuration files for any other type of
configuration, but you should store them in a separate repository. The
methodology recommends storing configuration as environment variables.
By doing so, you can have the same application deployed in different
environments but with different behaviors depending on the environment’s
configuration.

== 6 Logs

A cloud native application isn’t concerned with routing and storage of
logs. Applications should log to the standard output, treating logs as
events emitted in a sequence ordered by time. Log storage and rotation
are not application responsibilities anymore. An external tool (a log
aggregator) will fetch, collect, and make logs available for inspection.

== 7 Disposability

In a traditional environment, you would take much care of your
applications, ensuring they stay up and running and never terminate. In
a cloud environment, you don’t need to care that much: applications are
ephemeral. If a failure happens and the application doesn’t respond
anymore, you terminate it and start a new instance. If you have a
high-load peak, you can spin up more instances of your applications to
sustain the increased workload. We say that an application is disposable
if it can be started or stopped at any time.

To handle application instances in such a dynamic way, you should design
them to start up quickly whenever you need a new instance and gracefully
shut down when you don’t need them anymore. A fast startup enables the
elasticity of the system, ensuring robustness and resilience. Without a
fast startup, you will have performance and availability issues.

A graceful shutdown is when an application, on receiving a signal to
terminate, stops accepting new requests, completes the ones already in
progress, and finally exits. In the case of web processes, that is
straightforward. In other cases, such as with worker processes, the jobs
they were responsible for must be returned to the work queue, and only
afterward can they exit.

== 8 Backing services

Backing services can be defined as external resources that an
application uses to deliver its functionality. Examples of backing
services are databases, message brokers, caching systems, SMTP servers,
FTP servers, or RESTful web services. Treating them as attached
resources means that you can easily change them without modifying the
application code.

Consider how you use databases throughout the software development life
cycle. Chances are that you’ll use a different database depending on the
stage: development, testing, or production. If you treat the database as
an attached resource, you can use a different service depending on the
environment. The attachment is done through resource binding. For
example, resource binding for a database could consist of a URL, a
username, and a password.

== 9 Environment parity

Environment parity is about keeping all your environments as similar as
possible. In reality, there are three gaps that this factor tries to
address: * Time gap—The period between a code change and its deployment
can be quite large. The methodology strives to promote automation and
continuous deployment to reduce the period between when a developer
writes code to when it’s deployed in production. * People gap—Developers
build applications, and operators manage their deployment in production.
This gap can be resolved by embracing a DevOps culture, improving
collaboration between developers and operators, and embracing the "`you
build it, you run it`" philosophy. * Tools gap—One of the main
differences between environments is how backing services are handled.
For example, developers might use the H2 database in their local
environment but PostgreSQL in production. In general, the same type and
version of backing services should be used in all environments.

== 10 Administrative processes

Some management tasks are usually needed to support applications. Tasks
like database migrations, batch jobs, or maintenance jobs should be
treated as one-off processes. Just like application processes, the code
for administrative tasks should be tracked in revision control,
delivered with the application they support, and executed in the same
environment as the application.

It’s usually a good idea to frame administrative tasks as small
standalone services that run once and then are thrown away or as
functions configured in a stateless platform to be triggered when
certain events happen, or you can embed them in the application itself,
activating them by calling a specific endpoint.

== 11 Port binding

Applications following the 15-Factor methodology should be
self-contained and export their services via port binding. In
production, there might be some routing services that translate requests
from public endpoints to the internal port-bound services.

Unlike traditional applications that depend on an external server being
available in the execution environment, cloud native applications are
self-contained and export their services by binding to a port that can
be config- ured depending on the environment.

An application is self-contained if it doesn’t depend on an external
server in the execution environment. A Java web application would
probably run inside a server container like Tomcat, Jetty, or Undertow.
A cloud native application, in contrast, would not require the
environment to have a Tomcat server available; it would manage it itself
as any other dependency. Spring Boot, for example, lets you use an
embedded server: the application will contain the server rather than
depending on one being available in the execution environment. One of
the consequences of this approach is that there is always a one-to-one
mapping between application and server, unlike the traditional method
where multiple applications are deployed to the same server.

Cloud native applications should be self-contained and not dependent on
a server being available in the execution envi- ronment. Instead, the
necessary server capabilities are included in the application itself.
Spring Boot offers built-in server functionality that helps you remove
the exter- nal dependency and make the application standalone. Spring
Boot comes bundled with a preconfigured Tomcat server, but it’s possible
to replace it with Undertow, Jetty, or Netty.

The services provided by the application are then exported via port
binding. A web application would bind HTTP services to a specific port
and potentially become a backing service for another application. That’s
what usually happens in a cloud native system.

== 12 Stateless processes

In the previous chapter, you saw that high scalability is one reason why
we move to the cloud. To ensure scalability, we design applications as
stateless processes and adopt a share-nothing architecture: no state
should be shared among different application instances. Ask yourself if
any data would be lost should an instance of your application be
destroyed and recreated. If the answer is affirmative, then your
application is not stateless.

No matter what, we will always need to save some state, or our
applications will be useless in most cases. As a result, we design
applications to be stateless and then only handle the state in specific
stateful services like data stores. In other words, a stateless
application delegates the state management and storage to a backing
service.

____
The methodology was revised and expanded by Kevin Hoffman in his book
Beyond the Twelve-Factor App, refreshing the contents of the original
factors and adding three extra ones.
____

== 13 Concurrency

Creating stateless applications is not enough to ensure scalability. If
you need to scale, that means you need to serve more users. Therefore,
your applications should allow concurrent processing to serve many users
at the same time.

The 15-Factor methodology defines processes as first-class citizens.
Those processes should be horizontally scalable, distributing the
workload across many processes on different machines, and this
concurrent processing is only possible if the applications are
stateless. In JVM applications, we handle concurrency through multiple
threads, available from thread pools.

Processes can be classified according to their types. For example, you
might have web processes that handle HTTP requests and worker processes
that execute scheduled jobs in the background.

== 14 Telemetry

Observability is one of the properties of cloud native applications.
Managing a distributed system in the cloud is complex, and the only way
to manage such complexity is by ensuring that every system component
provides the correct data to monitor the system’s behavior remotely.
Examples of telemetry data are logs, metrics, traces, health status, and
events. Hoffman uses a very catchy image to stress the importance of
telemetry: treat your applications like space probes. What kind of
telemetry would you need to monitor and control your applications
remotely?

== 15 Authentication and authorization

Security is one of the essential qualities of a software system, but it
often doesn’t get the necessary attention. Following a zero-trust
approach, we must secure any interaction within the system at any
architectural and infrastructural levels. There is undoubtedly more to
security than just authentication and authorization, but those are a
good starting point.

With authentication, we can keep track of who is using the application.
Knowing that, we can then check the user permissions to verify whether
the user is allowed to perform specific actions. A few standards are
available for implementing identity and access management, including
OAuth 2.1 and OpenID Connect.